Although this widespread and egregious data harvesting was ultimately utilised to influence election results, it is debatable whether this incident constitutes ‘cybercrime’.

Cybercrime is commonly defined as criminal behaviours ‘in which the perpetrator uses special knowledge of cyberspace’ (Holt et al., 2015, p. 9), or any crime that is ‘facilitated or committed using a computer, network, or hardware device’ (Gordon & Ford, 2006, p. 14). Given that these definitions are predicated on criminality, the ambiguous legal status of  Cambridge Analytica and Facebook’s conduct ultimately prevents the straightforward application of this label. 

A key component of this scandal was the ‘sorely deficient’ nature of American law (Isaak & Hanna, 2018, p. 57). In particular, Hu (2020) argues that America lacked comprehensive privacy laws which could have led to greater accountability and clearer infractions of the law once the scandal was uncovered. Whilst some believe that Facebook’s conduct may have violated some State-level Computer Crime laws, their deficient and incomplete state makes this unclear (Woods, 2018). As such, it could be suggested that the Cambridge Analytica scandal was not ‘cybercrime’ in its strictest sense. 

However, others consider ‘cybercrime’ to also encompass civil wrongs committed through computer misuse (Smith et al., 2004). Consequently, Facebook’s violation of a 2011 privacy agreement with the Federal Trade Commission - which aimed to protect users against the unauthorised disclosure of private data to third parties - may enable the scandal to fall within this definition (Granville, 2018). This conclusion is bolstered by Facebook’s suggestion that Cambridge Analytica also violated a contractual data agreement which prohibited the sale of collected data (Romano, 2018). 

Although the users who completed the survey received payment for their data, they were grossly misled as to how it would be utilised (Hinds et al., 2020). More significantly, the millions of ‘connected’ users who also had their data harvested did not provide any form of consent (Schneble et al., 2018). As such, it is clear that their behaviour was deceitful and improper (Afriat et al., 2021), despite the fact that  ‘no systems were infiltrated, and no passwords or sensitive pieces of information were stolen or hacked’ (Grewal, 2018). 

On this basis, it appears most appropriate to describe the Cambridge Analytica scandal as an act of cybercrime. This is notwithstanding the absence of any clear infraction under America’s criminal framework.