One of the most concerning precedents to come from the Cambridge Analytica scandal is centred around Facebook’s culpability, as issues of social privacy become an increasing concern for the general public (Afriat et al., 2021). This can be explored utilising Sykes and Matza’s (1957) Neutralisation Theory. 

According to Sykes and Matza (1957), criminality can often bring offenders guilt and shame, leading deviant individuals to neutralise these feelings in order to protect their self-image. Consequently, offenders will turn to ‘techniques of neutralisation’ as a means to justify their deviance and provide relief from the moral repercussions of offending (Sykes & Matza, 1957). 

In the case of Cambridge Analytica, Facebook can be seen to have employed both ‘denial of responsibility’ and ‘denial of victim’ techniques, in which they externalise their behaviour and shift responsibility from themselves (Sykes & Matza, 1957). For example, Facebook argued that the data harvested was not taken without consumer consent, stating that  ‘people knowingly provided their information, no systems were infiltrated, and no passwords or sensitive pieces of information were stolen or hacked’ (Ma & Gilbert, 2019). By emphasising that no ‘data breach’ took place, Facebook sought to shift the blame for this scandal away from themselves. This is despite the fact that the survey participants did not agree to their data being used for political purposes, and the vast majority of victims provided no consent at all (Afriat et al., 2021). 

Moreover, Facebook denied ever providing Cambridge Analytica with data, claiming  that they ‘may have lots of data … about people who are on Facebook … but it is not data that [Facebook] provided’ (Ma & Gilbert, 2019). This ‘protective wall of neutralisation’ prevented Facebook from having to ‘confront [their] shame’,  as they hoped to persuade the public that the fault lay with Cambridge Analytica rather than themselves (Maruna & Copes, 2017, p. 48). However, this ploy did not last long, as Facebook was fined $5 billion by the Federal Trade Commissioner for failing to keep user data secure (Wong, 2019). This illustrates how, despite Facebook’s best efforts to deflect criticism, it was ultimately their responsibility to protect user data.