Following the revelation that Trump’s aide Stephen Bannon had exploited illegally obtained data in an attempt to influence the results of the 2016 Presidential Election, many were left wondering about the motivations behind his actions (Confessore, 2018).  

This behaviour can be analysed through Agnew’s (1992) general strain theory, which emphasises how the negative emotions associated with the possibility of election defeat might have played a part behind Trump’s campaigning decisions. 

Agnew (1992) suggested that experience of ‘strain’ has a significant impact on an individual’s emotional state, which in turn can promote criminal behaviour. These strains can be classified to include the threatened or actual failure to achieve positively valued goals, the threatened or actual removal of positively valued stimuli, and threatened or actual presentation of noxious stimuli (Holt et al., 2015). 

With regards to the Cambridge Analytica scandal, it could be argued that a threatened failure to achieve election success may explain Bannon’s motivations. Firstly, Trump was poorly received by the general public at the beginning of the election campaign, with the media portraying him as obnoxious and brash in comparison to Clinton (McAdams, 2016), who was initially perceived as a symbol of woman’s power and rationality (Zhou, 2016). At the time, there was general consensus within the public that there was no way somebody like Trump would ever get elected (Murray, 2017). Consequently, it is arguable that the significant threat of election failure led to Bannon doing anything that was necessary in order to improve Trump’s chances of victory, which ultimately took the form of data harvesting and psychological profiling of unsuspecting voters. 

It can also be argued that Agnew’s third category of strain - the threatened presentation of noxious stimuli - also influenced the behaviour of those involved in the scandal. In the eyes of Bannon and other wealthy right-wing Republican mega-donors associated with Cambridge Analytica, the election of Hilary Clinton would have posed a significant threat to their conservative values. This may explain why the company sought to resort to such extreme measures in an attempt to gain a political advantage. 